README.md, before:

# ml-zoomcamp-capstone-2-2024
## Description
This is DataTalksClub [ML Zoomcamp](https://github.com/DataTalksClub/machine-learning-zoomcamp) capstone 2 project repo.

It is trained on human faces dataset and tries to pedict if person in the image url is young or old. 

Dataset credit: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/goubeast/age-prediction-av

This model has different potential use cases:

Ex: Preferential access to senior citizens based on face recognition etc.

Here are step by step details about how we build optimal model to predict young or old probability. 

## 1. Data preparation, cleanup
Data downloaded from above kaggle source was in slightly different format: [raw_data](./raw_data)

It had images and corresponding csv mapping image to class OLD YOUNG or MIDDLE age.

This script turns it into format compatible for our model training: [segregate_images.py](./segregate_images.py)

We also use this script to split data in train and test folders in 75 % and 25 % ratio: [splitdata.py](./splitdata.py)

Here is the final tree strucure of data: [data](./data)

Note: we have ommited middle age images data for simplicity purpose.
```bash
data
├── test
│   ├── old
│   └── young
└── train
    ├── old
    └── young
```    
## 2. Training a model
Code here: [notebook.ipynb](./notebook.ipynb)

Note: You will need GPU support like saturn cloud to run this notebook.
https://app.community.saturnenterprise.io/

On CPU it will be very slow and prone to crash.

Note: We have also put code to build model from scratch but we haven't really used it.

We are mainly using transfer learning using pretrained base model as follows.

### 2.1 Base model
We are using Xception model as base model which is pretrained on imagenet dataset
### 2.2 Inner layer
We use inner layer with `relu` activation
### 2.3 Output layer
we add an output layer with two neurons since we are classifying images into two classes (e.g., "young" vs. "old").
### 2.4 Compile model
We use `Adam` optimizer

### 2.5 Find best learning rate
![best-learning-rate.png](./pictures/best-learning-rate.png)
Best learning rate is 0.001

### 2.6 Find best inner layer size
![pictures/best-inner-layer-size.png](./pictures/best-inner-layer-size.png)
Best inner layer size is 100

### 2.7 Data Augmentation
We add more flavors to data by shifing, rotating, flipping images

## 3. Saving model
We saved models with checkpoint.

We use model with best accuracy checkpoint: [xception_v1_08_0.893.keras](./xception_v1_08_0.893.keras)

Convert it to lighter TF-Lite model: [model.tflite](./model.tflite)

Here is a jupyter notebook which uses model.tflite and does prediction.

[tf_lite.ipynb](./tf_lite.ipynb)

And converted python script:

[tf_lite.py](./tf_lite.py)

## 4. Serving model locally via flask webservice
Run [predict.py](./predict.py) 

It will run prediction as websrive at url: http://localhost:5000/predict

We can test it by passing any valid url to face image and check prediction of age (Old or Young)

Here are some face image urls: [example-image-links](./example-image-links.txt)

Example:
```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nilarte/ml-zoomcamp-capstone-2-2024/refs/heads/main/data/test/young/10056.jpg"}' http://localhost:5000/predict
```

You can see probabilty of person in the image if they are old or young.

For above example probabilty is very high for young (arround 93%)
```bash
{
  "predictions": [
    0.06372705847024918,
    0.9362729787826538
  ]
}
```

## 5. Dependency and environment management
Here is the [Pipfile](./Pipfile) and [Pipfile.lock](./Pipfile.lock) file to manage dependencies like flask, keras-image-helper, tensorflow, gradio etc.

## 6. Cotainerization and Deploying via docker
Maintain all dependencies and run gradio based UI application to predict age.
[Dockerfile](./Dockerfile)

Pull docker container from public docker image at github registry

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/nilarte/age_prediction
```

Or simply build local image using Dockerfile
```bash
docker build -t  . age_prediction
```

Then run:
```bash
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/nilarte/age_prediction
```
You can access UI at http://localhost:5000/ in browser

Note: if above URL does not load right away wait for 2-3 mins to load.

Model is slightly bigger and container takes time to run fully. 

Input image URL and hit submit.

For example with this url from [example-image-links.txt](./example-image-links.txt)

https://images.pexels.com/photos/1474705/pexels-photo-1474705.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=600
 
You can observe loaded image and age predicted. 

Example screenshot: ![local-ui.png](./pictures/local-ui.png)

## 7. Cloud and Kubernetes deployment
We have also deployed webservice on GKE Google Kubernetes Engine Cluster.

Connect to webservice here: http://34.47.236.110:5000/

Rest of the steps are same as Docker section.

Here is the kubernetes deployment and service file: [age-prediction-service.yaml](./kubernetes/age-prediction-service.yaml)

## 8. Demo
Short demo can be downloaded and watched: [demo.mp4](./pictures/demo.mp4)

Commit message:

Added drop out steps in Readme

README.md, after:

# ml-zoomcamp-capstone-2-2024
## Description
This is DataTalksClub [ML Zoomcamp](https://github.com/DataTalksClub/machine-learning-zoomcamp) capstone 2 project repo.

It is trained on human faces dataset and tries to pedict if person in the image url is young or old. 

Dataset credit: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/goubeast/age-prediction-av

This model has different potential use cases:

Ex: Preferential access to senior citizens based on face recognition etc.

Here are step by step details about how we build optimal model to predict young or old probability. 

## 1. Data preparation, cleanup
Data downloaded from above kaggle source was in slightly different format: [raw_data](./raw_data)

It had images and corresponding csv mapping image to class OLD YOUNG or MIDDLE age.

This script turns it into format compatible for our model training: [segregate_images.py](./segregate_images.py)

We also use this script to split data in train and test folders in 75 % and 25 % ratio: [splitdata.py](./splitdata.py)

Here is the final tree strucure of data: [data](./data)

Note: we have ommited middle age images data for simplicity purpose.
```bash
data
├── test
│   ├── old
│   └── young
└── train
    ├── old
    └── young
```    
## 2. Training a model
Code here: [notebook.ipynb](./notebook.ipynb)

Note: You will need GPU support like saturn cloud to run this notebook.
https://app.community.saturnenterprise.io/

On CPU it will be very slow and prone to crash.

Note: We have also put code to build model from scratch but we haven't really used it.

We are mainly using transfer learning using pretrained base model as follows.

### 2.1 Base model
We are using Xception model as base model which is pretrained on imagenet dataset
### 2.2 Inner layer
We use inner layer with `relu` activation
### 2.3 Output layer
we add an output layer with two neurons since we are classifying images into two classes (e.g., "young" vs. "old").
### 2.4 Compile model
We use `Adam` optimizer

### 2.5 Find best learning rate
![best-learning-rate.png](./pictures/best-learning-rate.png)
Best learning rate is 0.001

### 2.6 Find best inner layer size
![pictures/best-inner-layer-size.png](./pictures/best-inner-layer-size.png)
Best inner layer size is 100

### 2.7 Find the best drop out rate
![best-drop-rate.png](./pictures/best-drop-rate.png)
Best drop rate is 0.002

### 2.8 Data Augmentation
We add more flavors to data by shifing, rotating, flipping images

### 2.9 Using the best learning rate, inner size and drop rate and checkpointing
We use the best learning rate, inner size and drop rate values and create model. 

We train and checkpoint this model.

## 3. Saving model
We saved models with checkpoint.

We use model with best accuracy checkpoint: [xception_v1_08_0.893.keras](./xception_v1_08_0.893.keras)

Convert it to lighter TF-Lite model: [model.tflite](./model.tflite)

Here is a jupyter notebook which uses model.tflite and does prediction.

[tf_lite.ipynb](./tf_lite.ipynb)

And converted python script:

[tf_lite.py](./tf_lite.py)

## 4. Serving model locally via flask webservice
Run [predict.py](./predict.py) 

It will run prediction as websrive at url: http://localhost:5000/predict

We can test it by passing any valid url to face image and check prediction of age (Old or Young)

Here are some face image urls: [example-image-links](./example-image-links.txt)

Example:
```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nilarte/ml-zoomcamp-capstone-2-2024/refs/heads/main/data/test/young/10056.jpg"}' http://localhost:5000/predict
```

You can see probabilty of person in the image if they are old or young.

For above example probabilty is very high for young (arround 93%)
```bash
{
  "predictions": [
    0.06372705847024918,
    0.9362729787826538
  ]
}
```

## 5. Dependency and environment management
Here is the [Pipfile](./Pipfile) and [Pipfile.lock](./Pipfile.lock) file to manage dependencies like flask, keras-image-helper, tensorflow, gradio etc.

## 6. Cotainerization and Deploying via docker
Maintain all dependencies and run gradio based UI application to predict age.
[Dockerfile](./Dockerfile)

Pull docker container from public docker image at github registry

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/nilarte/age_prediction
```

Or simply build local image using Dockerfile
```bash
docker build -t  . age_prediction
```

Then run:
```bash
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/nilarte/age_prediction
```
You can access UI at http://localhost:5000/ in browser

Note: if above URL does not load right away wait for 2-3 mins to load.

Model is slightly bigger and container takes time to run fully. 

Input image URL and hit submit.

For example with this url from [example-image-links.txt](./example-image-links.txt)

https://images.pexels.com/photos/1474705/pexels-photo-1474705.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=600
 
You can observe loaded image and age predicted. 

Example screenshot: ![local-ui.png](./pictures/local-ui.png)

## 7. Cloud and Kubernetes deployment
We have also deployed webservice on GKE Google Kubernetes Engine Cluster.

Connect to webservice here: http://34.47.236.110:5000/

Rest of the steps are same as Docker section.

Here is the kubernetes deployment and service file: [age-prediction-service.yaml](./kubernetes/age-prediction-service.yaml)

## 8. Demo
Short demo can be downloaded and watched: [demo.mp4](./pictures/demo.mp4)
